>> Audience 1: So, why do you prefer
using observables to promise?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So, the question is,
why do I prefer observables to promise?
The main reason being that a promise
can only ever return a single value.
An observable can return
many values over time.
So, are we hanging out tomorrow?
Are you coming to the workshop?
Just when I'm getting to the good part.
I mean, we had some bread.
Maybe some,
I don't know blooming onion or something.
We finally had our dinner salad and
tomorrow we're gonna sit down and
have steak and really get into it.
But I think you can stream and
if you can,
they I talk a lot about this but
the idea is that with an observable, so
I almost have to, I'm like do I jump in.
Do I [SOUND].
Let me show you actually
one image real quick.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: All right,
I can't help myself.
You guys gotta hear me talk about
observables for at least five minutes.
I'll talk about this tomorrow, but,
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: I
believe there's two really main problems,
or rather kind of two and
a half problems when it comes to an
application or maintaining an application.
So, you've heard me talk about
complexity as it involved state,
control flow and code volume.
So, this is actually a quote that comes
from a paper called Out of the Tar Pit.
And I believe it by by Ben Moseley and
Peter Marks if I'm not mistaken,
so this is something that
Victor Savkin shared with me.
It's about a 65-page,
I think it's like a dissertation or
it's some kind of very high
level PhD style white paper.
But, I recommend everybody read it.
I read it like three or
four times just to wrap my mind around.
The main this is probably the first 20
pages is really where you're gonna get
the most value.
Cuz then, it kinda veers off
into kind of academia, etcetera.
But he makes this, they make this
really good quote at the beginning.
In that the biggest problem with
applications is complexity.
Complexity is the result of state,
and as a result of state management,
we have control flow issues, and
code volume, that comes from that.
So now,
with that as the context I believe the two
biggest problems that we have especially
in an angular app in this context is one.
How do we manage state and
how do we communicate that?
So when something changes, how do we tell
the rest of our application that hey,
this thing happened?
And so, we've actually had two very
classy design patterns to address this.
So for state or managing state,
we have the iterator pattern.
And so, what this does is it
allows us to take a collection and
incrementally pull values off of it, so
we're gonna say next, next,
next, next until it's done.
At the same time, we have a pattern that's
very well suited for communication.
That's the observer pattern.
So, any time some
indeterminate event happens,
that we can communicate
that to our consumers.
That, hey, this thing happens.
So, by combining these two patterns
together, we have an observable.
Which allows us to
communicate state over time.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: And so this is
what an observable stream looks like.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: We have time and
as things happen along this timeline.
We can perform calculations and
either drive new state,
receive new state, or
transform state as we move along.
So along our timeline, we have events and
then with each event,
we have the opportunity to do something.
So which http, I think
people kind of have a superficial
understanding of observables,
because they've done .subscribe and
that's as far as it goes.
Because an http call is really just
a single value, you call a server,
you get something back and
then set a rather a restful call.
But for instance in the case of like,
let's say fire base or
a real-time web socket,
that streaming data overtime.
Well, this is something that
is actually you're getting
additional values as they come in.
This is where you would want to,
or this is where a promise would
just not be appropriate at all,
because a promise can only ever
return a single value and that's it.
But, what happens if there is another
value, or another value, or another value?
And so, this is where observables come in.
So, observables are very well
suited to handle a single value,
just like a promise.
But, they're also suited to not only
handle one value but multiple values.
So, that is essentially kind of the deal.
If you can think of, a promise is
I think of it as a courier in
a sense of like, there's a letter.
I'm going to deliver it and I'm done.
Mission accomplished.
Whereas, an observable is more like
a telephone connection like you're
actually on the phone until
you're ready to hang up.
So, you can continue to
communicate these events.
now where this gets,
to me I think the best
application to learn wrap your mind around
this observable stream is from UI events.,
Because whether you we notice it or
not, we are always admitting and
streaming dom events as we
interact with our application So
for instance, if we are dragging
our mouse across the screen,
we are emitting.
They're happening whether
we're capturing them or not.
And so now, using observable,
we can actually capture those things and
Do something with them.
And so, not only do we have the ability
to consume multiple values, but
those values are completely encapsulated
within the observable stream.
And because the observable
operators are pure in nature,
meaning no side effects, that you can
then stack them on top of each other.
And essentially, perform as many
transformations as you want,
until you get to the end of the road,
your subscribe block.
So, subscribe,
dot subscribe is kind of the equivalent
of really just invoking
the observable streams.
So, think of it like this,
I'm actually calling this and
I wanted to now, essentially,
flip the switch, and
it's on is that once your data
gets to your subscribe block.
It should be in it's final form and
Ready to dump, or rather,
ready to consume and
put right into your application.
So, when I started with observables,
kind of the very
first naive attempts Is I would say okay,
give me this data from this server,
and then within my subscribe block
is I would start fiddling with it.
And okay, now, I need to loop over, and
I need to do this, and I need to do this,
and I need to do this.
And then I realize,
I can actually do like .map,
like an additional map, like .filter.
You know da, da, da.
And by the time it gets to my
subscribe block it should be exactly
in the shape that I need.
And so being able to actually stack
these operators on top of each other.
And so this is for, especially
doing like data dashboard stuff.
Or like payroll or you know, whatever,
any kind of data transformation.
Here's this raw collection, and
at the bottom of the stream,
because we've stacked these
essentially peer functions
on top of each other is really
just totally functional.
Peer, no side effects.
It just kind of flows
through this funnel and
when it gets to the bottom it's
now in the shape that you want.
And so we're kind of familiar with this,
if you use for instance like low dash,
you can actually chain kind of these
higher order functions together.
I want a filter, I want a pick,
I want a map, I want to do these things.
And at the end of it I
wanna get that value.
So this is a similar
experience with observables,
so that we can now like stack
these things on top of each other.
Does that make sense?
>> Audience 1: Yes.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: I think it will make
more sense if you can actually stream
tomorrow, it's my most hopeful
desire that you can, but
that is kind of the five
minute elevator pitch.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: When I think of
observable, it's just a single event.
I think of promises as a single event.
I think observables as really an entire,
almost a warship if you will.
That it does tons of stuff.
And It's almost like an event
state platform unto itself.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Next question.
Shall we talk about love,
life, heartbreak?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Bro you're not
sneaking out, I can totally see you,
you're right on the front row.
This, you're busted.
Yes.
>> Audience 2: Sorry to keep
you on observables here,
but-
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Love to
talk about them.
>> Audience 2: In your example with
the API you called the get widget.
You're only going to call
that once from your app,
how is that different from a promise?
You're going to get your response,
what's the difference?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So in this case for
consuming the value it's exactly the same.
>> Audience 2: Okay.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: We see-
>> Audience 2: I get what you said when
you say we're observing events
that are coming from our template.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Let me see if
I can show you a better example.
So skipping through all these slides,
don't peek.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So here's an example.
So I think really UI events, when you
start to actually think of it from
the interface first, then I think
stream start to make a lot more sense.
Now, what if you actually wanted to
capture like an event click, and
resolve for do something in
resolved that is a promise.
Like, once you do it once that's it,
you can only resolve a promise one
time but with an observable stream.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: That you can capture
clicks over and over and over and over.
And so that's where every time
I click I want to reevaluate or
recalculate some value.
And so clicks, mouse events, mouse moves,
anything where something can continue to
emit events, that's where observables.
So I think maybe a better way of thinking
it of it is that well like promises and
observables like.
In the term of an ACP call,
like they're exactly the same.
Well, in most cases, yes.
But, pound for
pound, there's nothing a promise can do,
that a observable can't do better.
So, that alone is, like,
I'm just going to use observable.
And even then, as I thinks it's,
one, as it returns an observable,
to actually get it back to a promise you
actually have to do that extra step.
But you have essentially resolving
a single value from an async call,
that's boring.
But where it's really cool is for
things that continue to emit values.
>> Audience 2: Sure.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: And when we actually
talk about redux in an application store,
that as you change things
in application store,
it continues to actually
emit those values.
So I think the idea is making an async
call, they're kind of pound for pound.
It's like yeah, in this isolated example,
but what about the other 10,000 things
that you can use observable string for.
Yes.
>> Audience 3: Chris had a question
several minutes ago now.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Sorry Chris.
>> Audience 3: No, that's my fault.
I don't want to display a part of my page
until I get my data from the service, and
I don't wanna use resolve.
Currently, just using an is-loaded
Boolean, and set it to True once I get my
data, and wrap my def in an NGF is-loaded,
is there a better approach to this?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So,
you can leave it essentially undefined.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Initially, and
then just check to see is this,
does this have a value?
So let's actually try that out.
Let's see what happens.
I hope I don't get embarrassed.
Oops.
There we go.
Tweet deck.
I'm getting embarrassed.
All right.
So, let's go to our widget's component.
And so, you can see here,
initially, widget does not exist.
Or rather, it's undefined.
Like, it's defined.
But there's certainly no value.
So it's there, but
it's of value undefined.
I think that's correct.
So if we go here.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: ngIF.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: This may or
may not work.
I don't know if I've tried this.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: ngIF widgets,
widgets, widgets, [INAUDIBLE].
Did I break this?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Can't have multiple
template bindings with All right.
Don't be mad.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Yeah,
all right let's refresh this.
it's already there let me
just clear my cache maybe.
There's probably a way in chrome
to actually slow this down.
>> Audience 4: You can put a pause in
your service call before it returns it's
values.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: A pause.
>> Audience 4: Like in your mapping or
something.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: I could.
>> Audience 3: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: I could do a time out.
[SOUND]
Let's do it here.
So timeout.
No, I just wanna use the native timeout.
>> Audience 2: Ooh, setTimeout.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Is it setTimeout?
>> Audience 2: Yep.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Yeah, okay.
So is it function then interval?
>> Audience 2: Yes.
>> Audience 3: Yes.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Okay,
yes, that was so forceful.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So, is it okay?
All right, let's see, I don't know,
Yolo One, two, three, boom.
All right, so all I've simply done,
in this case,
is ngf will evaluate to false
if something is undefined.
And so here,
I'm just saying if it exists, show it.
And if not show not here, I think
there is a throttle in Chrome dev tools
>> Audience 4: Yeah Chris that I
mentioned that
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So
that's another way to do that.
Yes, next question
>> Audience 4: Dale is asking you
subscribe to an observable,
that implies an unsubscribe Are there
garbage collection leakage issues
associated with cleaning up observables?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So
I don't wanna answer that question,
cuz I think it's stupid.
But what question do you have?
>> Multiple: [LAUGH]
>> Audience 3: I have a different
question.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: No, what?
>> Audience 3: No, back to the-
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Is that a different
Dale?
>> Audience 3: No back to this other
question, of showing something else,
you said you could put it
inside the directive
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Okay just to clarify
that was a different Dale,
I thought that was you
>> Audience 3: It was [LAUGH]
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Okay that was
definitely stupid
>> Audience 3: Okay thank you,
inside the template when
you have a new component
you could put the value in there and
it would get replaced.
Wouldn't that be a place
to put your wait for
it
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: I'm
sorry one more time?
>> Audience 3: Well when we do a selector.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Mm-hm?
>> Audience 3: And
we could put a loading inside of that,
wouldn't that be a way to address-
>> Audience 5: Just like
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Right, so it only,
actually, interesting question.
I've only ever tried to do
this on the main component.
Well, okay.
Yes so if we do that.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Let's see.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So, no.
That actually, that one worked,
because the widget's list
component will load immediately,
and then the actual data for
the list will actually happen.
Like so asynchronous point.
So the problem is that your
component will render and
then as things come in it will
attempt to render those as well.
>> Audience 3: So it really only works at
the app level while you're bootstrapping.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Yeah, because there's
no angle to actually do anything.
So it actually does
truly have to bootstrap.
>> Audience 5: Okay,
is that along the lines of ngCloak?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Yes, but
that kind of solves that problem.
The fact that-
>> Audience 5: Sometimes-
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Nothing renders
until it's there.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Also, because any
type of DOM manipulation is wrapped in
the template tag.
And so that is the browser wanna ask
you render a template tag until it's
been initialized or until there's
actually content inside of it.
Or they're some event in
which template tag will be.
I didn't even know it's
a real tag until actually
I was reading the doc some template.
What is this?
It actually has to do with
the web component spec.
And it doesn't, there's a certain point
at which it will not actually render
until other things are in place.
So that solves that kind of
flash of unstyled data sorts.
Okay, I feel like there was another
question about unsubscribe.
Dale, would you like to ask that now?
>> Multiple: [LAUGH]
>> Audience 3: Well if is was just
a question of you subscribe to things
like a lot of times in Java if you
subscribe as a listener to things,
then you can end up leaking things because
somebody holds a reference,
does crap with a weak reference.
So I'm wondering if you start
subscribing to a lot of things,
if you pin things in memory?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: You can, so
this is what onDestroy is for.
That when you call that subscribe,
that actually returns essentially
an unsubscribe method.
If you actually look at the source
code in the constructor,
that's what it actually returns is
a method to basically kill itself.
And that's where you would use onDestroy.
Essentially unsubscribe from
anything including observables.
>> Audience 3: So
if I do a service call, subscribe to it,
then I should do the onDestroy thing and
unsubscribe.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: That would
be a very boy scout thing to do.
>> Audience 3: So it's not necessary?
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So browsers in
Angular 2 is very, very performant and
it's very good about cleaning that up.
>> Audience 3: Okay.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So
you're probably going to be okay.
But at the same time you're not going to
offend anybody by being a good neighbor.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Next, if there are no
more questions in the next three seconds,
I'm kicking everybody out.
Yes?
>> Audience 1: How is the API set up
on the local What 3000 or whatever it is.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Uh-huh.
>> Audience 1: How is that set up
cuz our site is running on 2200.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: Uh-huh.
>> Audience 1: So
somehow we can get to the json through.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: So that's actually
json server which is just another mpm
module.
>> Audience 1: And somehow [INAUDIBLE]
>> Audience 4: If you look in the kit,
there's a server directory
at the same level source.
>> Audience 1: Yeah I see it.
>> Audience 4: Okay.
>> Audience 1: But
how does-
>> Audience 4: So-
>> Audience 1: It know
to open up that port.
>> Audience 4: If you look in the MPM
start stuff you'll see the JSON server.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: And so
if we go to package.json or packages.json.
On line seven, I'm basically saying,
concurrently, I want to run server.
Which is essentially the line eight,
which we're calling spin up JSON server.
And watch this db.json file.
>> Audience 1: Okay.
>> Audience 1: Thank you.
>> Lukas Ruebbelke: And so
completely unrelated to Angular2,
this is a great way to spin
up a rest API really quickly.
Now I've actually done projects where
we're full steam head on the UI.
And services are handled by another team,
and actually in one case, another company.
And who knows when they'll be done?
But because we can agree on
really the interface of this
is what we're going to get at some point.
We just basically mocked
out a bunch of data.
Served it up using JSON Server.
Built everything.
And then when it was ready, we just
dropped it in and it was good to go.